The Internet is the most widespread and rapidly adopted technology in the history of humanity. In only decades, Inter net use has completely reinvented the ways in which we search for information, consume media and entertainment, and man age our social networks and relationships. With the even more recent advent of smartphones, Internet access has become portable and ubiquitous to the point at which the population of the developed world can be considered "online" 13 .

However, the impact that this new channel for connection, information, communication, and screen time is having on our brains and cognitive functioning is unclear. Prior to the Inter net, a large body of research had convincingly demonstrated that the brain is somewhat malleable to environmental de mands and stimuli, particularly with regards to learning new processes, due to its capacity for neuroplasticity 4 . Various sce narios have been observed to induce longterm changes in the neuronal architecture of the human brain, including second language acquisition 5 , learning new motor skills (such as jug gling) 6 , and even formal education or exam preparation 7 . The widespread use of the Internet across the globe has introduced, for many, the necessity and opportunity to learn a myriad of new skills and ways to interact with society, which could bring about neural changes. As an example, even simple interactions with the Internet through the smartphone's touchscreen inter face have been demonstrated to bring about sustained neuro cognitive alterations due to neural changes in cortical regions associated with sensory and motor processing of the hand and thumb 8 . Beyond this, the Internet also presents a novel plat form for almostendless learning of new information and com plex processes, relevant to both the online and offline world 9 .

Along with neuroplastic mechanisms, other environmen tal and biological factors can also cause changes in the brain's structure and function, resulting in cognitive decline 10 . In ag ing samples, for instance, there is evidence to indicate that age related cognitive decline may be partly driven by a process of atrophy. Some studies have shown that adopting a less engag ing lifestyle across the lifespan may accelerate loss of cognitive function 11 , due to lower "cognitive reserve" (the ability of the brain to withstand insult from age and/or pathology) 12 . Some emerging evidence indicates that disengaging from the "real world" in favor of virtual settings may similarly induce adverse neurocognitive changes. For example, a recent randomized controlled trial (RCT) 13 found that six weeks of engaging in an online role playing game caused significant reductions in grey matter within the orbitofrontal cortex -a brain region impli cated in impulse control and decision making. However, the study did not address the extent to which these results were specific to online gaming, rather than general internet usage. Nonetheless, this raises the possibility that various types of In ternet usage could differentially affect the brain and cognitive processes -in both adverse and beneficial ways. This may be of particular relevance to the developing brains of children and adolescents, as many cognitive processes (particularly those relevant to higher executive functions and social cognition) are not entirely innate, but rather are strongly influenced by environmental factors 14 .

Although only recently emerging, this possibility has led to a substantial body of research empirically investigating the mul tiple potential pathways through which the Internet could af fect our brains' structure, function, and cognitive development. Specifically, the bulk of existing research can be separated into three specific domains, examining how the internet is affecting: a) attention (i.e., how the constant influx of online information, prompts and notifications competing for our attention may encourage individuals to displace their concentration across multiple incoming media streams -and the consequences this may have for attentionalswitching versus sustainedattention tasks); b) memory and knowledge (i.e., the extent to which we rely on the Internet as our primary informational resource, and how unique properties of online information access may affect how we process new memories and value our internal knowl edge); c) social cognition (along with the personal and societal consequences of increasingly embedding our social networks, interactions, and status within the online world).

In this stateoftheart review, we present the current lead ing hypotheses of how the Internet may alter these cognitive processes, subsequently examining the extent to which these hypotheses are supported by recent findings from psychologi cal, psychiatric and neuroimaging research. In this way, we ag gregate the contemporary evidence arising from multiple fields of research to produce revised models on how the Internet may be affecting our brains and cognition. Furthermore, whereas studies to date have focused upon only specific age groups, we examine the effects of the Internet on the human brain across the entire life course. In particular, we explore how the potential benefits/drawbacks of extensive Internet integration with cognitive processes may differ among children and older adults. Finally, we identify important gaps in the existing litera ture to present key priorities for future research in order to gain new insights for minimizing detrimental effects of the Internet, while capitalizing on this new feature of our societies to poten tially influence neurocognitive processes in a beneficial way.

The Internet consumes a considerable chunk of our atten tion on a daytoday basis. The vast majority of adults go on line daily, and over a quarter report being online "almost constantly" 2 . Within this, one in five American adults are now "smartphone only" Internet users 1 . Importantly, the in troduction of these Internetenabled mobile devices has also reduced the "digital divide" previously experienced by lower and middle income countries 15 . The amount and frequency of Internet usage is even more pronounced amongst young er people. Most adults today witnessed the beginning of the transition from "Internetfree" to "Interneteverywhere" socie ties. However, younger generations (termed "digital natives" 16 ) have been brought up entirely within a "connected world" , par ticularly in developed countries. Consequently, digital natives are often the first to adopt new online technologies as they arise 16 , and engage extensively with all existing features of the Internet. For instance, 95% of US teens have access to a smart phone, and 45% are online "almost constantly" 3 .

Multiple factors are driving the rapid uptake and extensive usage of Internetenabled technologies across the globe. This is partly due to the Internet now being unavoidable, ubiquitous, and a highly functional aspect of modern living. For instance, Internet use is now deeply entwined with education, travel, socializing, commerce, and the majority of workplaces. Along with pragmatic uses, the Internet also offers an endless array of recreational and entertainment activities, through podcasts, ebooks, videos, streaming movies and gaming. However, the ability of the Internet to capture and hold attention is not solely due to the quality of media content available online. Rather, it is also driven by the underlying design and presentation of the online world. One such example is the selfevolving "attraction mechanism"; whereby aspects of the Internet that fail to gain attention are quickly drowned out in the sea of incoming in formation, while the successful aspects of the adverts, articles, apps or anything that does manage to capture our attention (even superficially) are logged (through clicks and scrolls), noticed (through online shares), and subsequently prolifer ated and expanded upon. Alongside this, leading technology companies have been accused of intentionally capitalizing on the addictive potential of Internet, by studying, testing, and refining the attentiongrabbing aspects of their websites and applications ("apps") to promote extremely high levels of en gagement, without due concern for user well being 17 .

Furthermore, even when not using the Internet for any spe cific purpose, smartphones have introduced widespread and habitual "checking" behaviours, characterized by quick but fre quent inspections of the device for incoming information from news, social media, or personal contacts 18 . These habits are thought to be the result of behavioural reinforcement from "in formation rewards" that are received immediately on checking the device 19 , potentially engaging the corticostriatal dopa minergic system due to their readily available nature 20 . The variableratio reinforcement schedule inherent to device check ing may further perpetuate these compulsive behaviours 21 .

The unprecedented potential of the Internet to capture our attention presents an urgent need for understanding the impact that this may have on our thought processes and well being. Already, education providers are beginning to perceive detri mental effects of the Internet on children's attention, with over 85% of teachers endorsing the statement that "today's digital technologies are creating an easily distracted generation" 22 . The primary hypothesis on how the Internet affects our attentional capacities is through hyperlinks, notifications, and prompts providing a limitless stream of different forms of digital media, thus encouraging us to interact with multiple inputs simulta neously, but only on a shallow level, in a behavioural pattern termed "media multitasking" 23,24 .

The seminal study by Ophir et al 23 was among the first to ex plore the sustained impact of media multitasking on cognitive capacities. This was a crosssectional study of individuals who engaged in "heavy" (i.e., frequent and extensive) media multi tasking compared to those who did not. Cognitive testing of the two groups produced the thensurprising finding that those involved in heavy media multitasking performed worse in taskswitching tests than their counterparts -contrary to the authors' expectation that the "extra practice" afforded by frequent media multitasking would confer cognitive benefit in taskswitching scenarios. Closer inspection of findings sug gested that the impeded taskswitching ability in heavy media multitasking individuals was due to their increased suscep tibility to distraction from irrelevant environmental stimuli 23 .

Since these initial findings, the effects of media multi tasking on cognition have come under increasing scrutiny, because the increasingly diverse forms of entertainment and activities available through the online world can further our capabilities (and temptation) of engaging in media multi tasking 25 , even on single devices. For instance, Yeykelis et al 26 measured partici pants' media multitasking between different types of online media content while using just one device (personal laptops), and found that switches occurred as frequently as every 19 seconds, with 75% of all onscreen content being viewed for less than one minute. Measures of skin conductance during the study found that arousal increased in the seconds leading up to media switching, reaching a high point at the moment of the switch, followed by a decline afterward 26 . Again, this suggests that the proclivity for alternating between different computer windows, opening new hyperlinks, and performing new searches could be driven by the readily available nature of the informational rewards, which are potentially awaiting in the unattended media stream. Supporting this, the study also found that, whereas switching from work related content to entertainment was associated with increased arousal in antici pation of the switch, there was no anticipatory arousal spike as sociated with entertainment to workcontent switches 26 .

The growing concern around the increasing amount of me dia multitasking with the spread of ubiquitous Internet access has resulted in further empirical studies. These have produced conflicting findings, with some failing to find any adverse effects on attention 27 , and others indicating that media multi tasking may even be linked to increased performance for other aspects of cognition, such as multisensory integration 28 . Nonetheless the literature, on balance, does seem to indicate that those who engage in frequent and extensive media multi tasking in their daytoday lives perform worse in various cognitive tasks than those who do not, particularly for sustained attention 25 .

Imaging studies have shed light onto the neural differences which may account for these cognitive deficits. Functionally, those who engage in heavy media multitasking perform poor er in distracted attention tasks, even though exhibiting greater activity in right prefrontal regions 29 . As right prefrontal regions are typically activated in response to distractor stimuli, the ob served increases in recruitment of these regions alongside poorer performance suggests that heavy media multitaskers require greater cognitive effort to maintain concentration when faced with distractor stimuli 29 . Structurally, high levels of Internet usage 30 and heavy media multitasking 31 are asso ciated with decreased grey matter in prefrontal regions associ ated with maintaining goals in face of distraction (such as the right frontal pole and anterior cingulate cortex). However, the findings to date must be interpreted with caution, as various confounding factors may be affecting the results of these cross sectional imaging studies. Although the differences persist when controlling for general digital media use and other simple confounders (age, gender, etc.), further research is required to examine if the observed neural differences are specifically at tributable to heavy vs. light media multitasking, or in fact driv en by broader differences in lifestyle between the two groups.

Given the amount of time that people now spend in media multitasking via personal digital devices, it is increasingly rel evant to consider not only sustained changes which arise in those who engage in large amounts of media multitasking, but also the acute effects on immediate cognitive capacities. A metaanalysis of 41 studies showed that engaging in multi tasking was associated with significantly poorer overall cogni tive performance, with a moderatetolarge effect size (Cohen's d=-0.71, 95% CI: -0.86 to -0.57). This has been confirmed by more recent studies, further showing that even shortterm engagement with an extensively hyperlinked online environ ment (i.e., online shopping for 15 minutes) reduces attentional scope for a sustained duration after coming offline, whereas reading a magazine does not produce these deficits 32 .

Overall, the available evidence strongly indicates that en gaging in multitasking via digital media does not improve our multitasking performance in other settings -and in fact seems to decrease this cognitive capacity through reducing our abil ity to ignore incoming distractions. Much of the multi tasking investigations so far have been focusing on personal com puters. However, smartphone technologies may even further encourage people to engage in media multitasking through high rates of incoming prompts from emails, direct messages and social media notifications occurring while both using and not using the device. Thus, along with determining longterm consequences of media multitasking, future research should examine how the constant multitasking made possible by Internetenabled mobile devices may impact daily functioning through acute but high frequency effects.

Furthermore, both the immediate and chronic effects of media multitasking are relatively unexplored in children and adolescents, who are the prime users of such technologies 33 and are at a phase of development that is crucial for refining higher cognitive abilities 14 . The first longitudinal study of me dia multitasking in young people has recently found that fre quent multitasking behaviours do predict the development of attentional deficits specifically in early adolescents, but not in older teens 34 . Additionally, extensive media multitasking dur ing childhood and adolescence could also negatively impact cognitive development through indirect means, by reducing engagement with academic and social activities, as well as by interfering with sleep 35 , or reducing the opportunity to engage in creative thinking 36,37 . Clearly, further research is necessary to properly measure the effects of ubiquitous computing on children's cognitive development, and to find practical ways for ameliorating any detrimental impact this may be having.

In response to the question "How has the Internet changed your life?" , some common answers include finding new friends, renewing old friendships, studying online, finding romantic relationships, furthering career opportunities, shopping, and travel 38 . However, the most common answer is people stating that the Internet has "changed the way in which they access information" 38 . Indeed, for the first time in human history, the majority of people living in the developed world have access to almost all factual information in existence literally at their fingertips.

Along with the obvious advantages, this unique situation also introduces the possibility of the Internet ultimately negat ing or replacing the need for certain human memory systemsparticularly for aspects of "semantic memory" (i.e., memory of facts) -which are somewhat independent from other types of memory in the human brain 39 . An initial indication of Internet information gathering affecting typical memory processes was provided by Sparrow et al 40 , who demonstrated that the ability to access information online caused people to become more likely to remember where these facts could be retrieved rather than the facts themselves, indicating that people quickly be come reliant on the Internet for information retrieval.

It could be argued that this is not unique to the Internet, but rather just an example of the online world acting as a form of external memory or "transactive memory" 40,41 . Transactive memory has been an integral part of human societies for mil lennia, and refers to the process by which people opt to out source information to other individuals within their families, communities, etc., such that they are able to just remember the source of the knowledge, rather than attempting to store all of this information themselves 41 . Although beneficial at a group level, using transactive memory systems does reduce an indi vidual's ability to recall the specifics of the externally stored in formation 42 . This may be due to individuals using transactive memory for "cognitive offloading" , implicitly reducing their allocation of cognitive resources towards remembering this information, since they know this will be available for future reference externally. This phenomenon has been demonstrated in multiple contexts, including those of team work 43 and other "nonInternet" technologies (e.g., photography reducing indi viduals' memories of the objects they photographed) 44 .

However, it is becoming clear that the Internet actually pre sents something entirely novel and distinct from previous transactive memory systems 45,46 . Crucially, the Internet seems to bypass the "transactional" aspect that is inherent to other forms of cognitive offloading in two ways. First, the Internet does not place any responsibility on the user to retain unique infor mation for others to draw upon (as would typically be re quired in human societies) 45 . Second, unlike other transactive mem ory stores, the Internet acts as a single entity that is responsible for holding and retrieving virtually all factual information, and thus does not require individuals to remember what exact in formation is externally stored, or even where it is located. In this way, the Internet is becoming a "supernormal stimulus" 46 for transactive memory -making all other options for cogni tive offloading (including books, friends, community) become redundant, as they are outcompeted by the novel capabilities for external information storage and retrieval made possible by the Internet.

Unfortunately, the rapid methods of acquisition and con stant availability of information afforded by the Internet may not necessarily lead to better use of information gained. For instance, an experimental study 47 found that individuals in structed to search for specific information online completed the information gathering task faster than those using printed encyclopedias, but were subsequently less able to recall the in formation accurately.

During Internet and encyclopedia information gathering tasks, functional magnetic resonance imaging was used to examine activation in the ventral and dorsal streams. These regions are referred to as the "what" and "where" streams, re spectively, due to their indicated roles in storing either the specific content (ventral stream) or external location (dorsal stream) of incoming information 47 . Although there was no dif ference in activation of the dorsal stream, results showed that the poorer recall of Internetsought information compared to encyclopediabased learning was associated with reduced ac tivation of the ventral ("what") stream during online informa tion gathering. These findings further support the possibility, initially raised by Sparrow et al 40 , that online information gath ering, while faster, may fail to sufficiently recruit brain regions for storing information on a longterm basis.

The potential for online searching to produce a sustained impact upon our cognitive processes has been investigated in a series of studies examining prepost changes following a sixday Internet search training paradigm. In these studies, young adults were given an hour per day of Internet search tasks, and undertook an array of cognitive and neuroimaging assessments pre and posttraining. Results showed that the sixday Internet search training reduced regional homogeneity and functional connectivity of brain areas involved in long term memory formation and retrieval (e.g., temporal gyrus) 48 . This indicates that a reliance on online searching may impede mem ory retrieval by reducing the functional connectivity and syn chronization of associated brain regions 48 . Furthermore, when faced with new questions after the six days, the training had increased participants' selfreported impulses towards using the Internet to answer those questions, which was reflected in a recruitment of prefrontal brain areas required for behavioural and impulse control 49 . This increased propensity for relying on Internet searches for gathering new information has been repli cated in subsequent studies 50 , and is in keeping with the "super normal stimulus" nature of the Internet, potentially suggesting that online information gathering quickly trains people to be come dependent on this tool when faced with unknown issues.

However, despite the possible adverse effects on regular "offline" memory, the sixdays training did make people more efficient at using the Internet for retrieving information, as par ticipants became faster at the search tasks, with no loss of accu racy 51 . Search training also produced increases in white matter integrity of the fiber tracts connecting the frontal, occip ital, parietal and temporal lobes, significantly more than the non search control condition 52 . In other studies, cognitive offload ing via digital devices has also been found to improve people's ability to focus on aspects that are not immediately retrievable, and thus remember these better in the future 53 .

These findings seem to support the emergent hypotheses that relying on the Internet for factual memory storage may actually produce cognitive benefit in other areas, perhaps by "freeing up" cognitive resources 54 , and thus enabling us to use our newly available cognitive capacities for more ambitious undertakings than previously possible 45 . Researchers advo cating this view have pointed to multiple domains of collec tive human endeavor that have already been transformed by the Internet's provision of supernormal transactive memory, such as education, journalism and even academia 55 . As online technologies continue to advance (particularly with regards to "wearables"), it is conceivable that the performance ben efits from the Internet, which are already visible at the societal level, could ultimately become integrated within individuals themselves, enabling new heights of cognitive function 56 .

Unfortunately, however, a more sobering finding with re gards to the immediate possibility of ubiquitous Internet ac cess enabling new heights of human intelligence is provided by Barr et al 57 , who observed that analytical thinkers, with higher cognitive capacities, actually use their smartphone less for transactive memory in daytoday situations compared to in dividuals with nonanalytical thinking styles. Furthermore, the reduced smartphone usage in analytical versus non analytical thinkers was specific to online information searching, with no differences in social media or entertainment usages, thus indi cating that the differences are likely due to the Internet further ing "cognitive miserliness" among less analytical thinkers 57 .

Alongside this, the increasing reliance on the Internet for information may cause individuals to "blur the lines" between their own capabilities and their devices' 58 . In a series of experi ments, Fisher et al 59 investigated how the Internet influences our selfperceived knowledge. Results showed that online searching increases our sense of how much we know, even though the illusion of selfknowledge is only perceived for the domains in which the Internet can "fill in the gaps" for us. The experiments also demonstrated how quickly individuals inter nalized the Internet's external knowledge as their own -as even immediately after using the Internet to answer the task ques tions, participants attributed their higher quality explanations to "increased brain activity" . More recent studies have shown that illusions of selfknowledge similarly persist when using smartphones to retrieve online information 58 . As individuals become more and more connected with their personal digital devices (which are also always accessible), it seems inevitable that the distinction between self and Internet's abilities will be come increasingly elusive, potentially creating a constant illu sion of "greater than actual knowledge" among large portions of the population.

Overall, the Internet clearly can provide a "superstimulus" for transactive memory, which is already changing the way we store, retrieve, and even value knowledge. However, with pop ular online information sources such as Google and Wikipedia less than 20 years old, it is currently not possible to ascertain how this may eventually be reflected in longterm changes to the structure and function of the human brain. Nonetheless, our constant connection with the online world through per sonal devices (i.e., smartphones), along with the emerging po tential for more direct integration through wearable devices, certainly indicates that we are set to become more reliant on the Internet for factual information as time goes on. Also, whereas the studies described above have focused on factual knowledge, the Internet is also now becoming a superstimulus for spatial information (through providing constant access to online maps and global positioning system). As spatial mem ory is somewhat independent from semantic memory in the human brain 60 , further research should investigate the multi tude of ways in which extensive use of these external memory systems may reduce, enhance or alter our cognitive capacities.

Social relationships and having a sense of connection are important determinants of happiness and stress relief 61,62 , mental and physical wellbeing 63,64 , and even mortality 65 . Over the past decade, the proportion of an individual's social interactions that take place online within social networking sites (e.g., Facebook, Instagram, Twitter) has grown dramati cally 66,67 , and our connection with these sites is now strongly meshed with the offline world. The realworld implications of this are perhaps best evidenced by the critical role that social media have played in multiple global affairs, including report edly starting and precipitating the London Riots, the Occupy movement 68 , and even the Arab Spring 69 , along with poten tially influencing the outcomes of the UK's European Union Referendum ("Brexit") 70 and the 2016 US elections 71 . Clearly, understanding the shift from realworld interactions into the online social environment (and vice versa) holds significance to almost all aspects of people's lives.

Our motivations towards using social media is broadly simi lar to the instinctual desires underlying "real world" social in teractions, as people are drawn to online sociality in order to exchange information and ideas, along with gaining social sup port and friendships 72 . However, whether or not these virtual interactions engage the human brain in ways analogous to real world socialization remains a topic of debate since the turn of the century 73 . Whereas it would be highly beneficial if social me dia sites could fulfil the implicit human needs for social connec tion, it may be that the distinction between online and offline networks is so great that entirely different cognitive domains are involved in navigating these different environments 74,75 .

To investigate the neuroimaging correlates of offline and online networks, the seminal study by Kanai et al 74 collected realworld social network size, online sociality (i.e., Facebook friends) and magnetic resonance imaging scans from 125 par ticipants. Results showed that both realworld social network size and number of Facebook friends were significantly as sociated with amygdala volume. As this has previously been established as a key brain region for social cognition and so cial network size 76 , these results present a strong case for the overlap between online and offline sociality in the human brain.

However, those authors also found that the grey matter vol ume of other brain regions (specifically, posterior regions of the middle temporal gyrus and superior temporal sulcus, and the right entorhinal cortex) were predicted by the numbers of participants' Facebook friends, but held no relationship to their realworld social networks. This suggests that certain unique aspects of social media implicate aspects of the brain that are not central in "realworld" social settings. For instance, the tendency for online networks to encourage us towards holding many weak social connections, involving thousands of faceto name pairs, could require high associative memory capacities, which is not typically required in real world networks (as these are comprised of fewer, but more familiar, relationships) 74 . As associative memory formation for nameface pairs involves the right entorhinal cortex 77,78 , this could explain the exclusive relationship that this region holds with online social (but not realworld) network size 74 . Indeed, one key difference which may separate how the brain handles online and offline social networks is the unique capacity afforded by the Internet for people to hold, and si multaneously interact with, millions of "friendships" 79,80 . Em pirical testing of this hypothesis is a most fruitful area of in vestigation stemming from research into the fundamental similarities and differences between these two social worlds at a biological level 66 . When defining "friendships" under a broad context (people who maintain contact and share an emotional bond) 66 , two patterns are prominent across a diverse range of realworld social networks: a) the average individual has around 150 "friendships" (but this is highly variable between individuals), and b) this is made up of five hierarchical layers, consisting of primary partners, intimate relationships, best friends, close friends, and all friends, which follow a size scal ing ratio of around 3 (i.e., each cumulative layer is 3 times big ger than the last), and therefore have set average (cumulative/ inclusive) sizes of 1.5, 5, 15, 50 and 150 respectively 66 . The pat terns of the average number of 150 total friendship connections, and the scaling sizes of the five hierarchical layers of relation ships making this up, have been found across regions and time periods within various human organizations, ranging from hunter gatherer societies 81,82 and historical village popula tions 83 , armies 66 , residential camps 84 , to personal networks of modern Europeans 85 .

Thus, given the unprecedented potential that online social networks allow in terms of number of connections, and the var ied contexts these take place over 79,80 , it is imaginable that this extraordinary environment may allow these two apparently set aspects of realworld social networks to be bypassed. However, recent findings have confirmed that usertouser friendship connections, posting patterns and exchanges within Twitter, Facebook, and even online gaming platforms, all indicate a similar average number of general friendships (around 150, de spite high skew), along with maintaining the same scaled sizes of the hierarchical structure of the five distinct friendship layers (as determined by reciprocal communication exchanges) 8689 . Therefore, even within the unique realms of online social net works, the most fundamental operations of human social networks appear to remain relatively unchanged 88,89 . So, it is highly conceivable that the social connections formed in the online world are processed in similar ways to those of the off line world, and thus have much potential to carry over from the Internet to shape "realworld" sociality, including our so cial interactions and our perceptions of social hierarchies, in ways that are not restricted to the context of the Internet.

The driving forces that sustain the set structural patterns of social networks, even when faced with the immense connec tive potential of the online world, may be broadly explained by two overlapping mechanisms. First, constraints on social cognition within the human brain seem to carry over across social contexts 66 . For instance, humans struggle to engagingly interact with more than three individuals simultaneously in the real world, and this limitation on attention also appears to apply online 90,91 . This evidence is in agreement with the hy pothesis that circumventing the cognitive constraints on social relationships may be difficult even when technology affords unnatural opportunities to do so 88 .

The second driver of set boundaries on social activity is that simple underlying factors may produce social constraints, even within online settings. Most obviously, investment in so cial relationships is limited by time constraints, and this may contribute to the set patterns of both the number and type of social connections 93,94 . In line with this, analyses across vari ous social contexts have shown that temporal limitations gov ern the number of social interactions that individuals engage in, and how they distribute these across their different kinds of relationships 93,94 . Again, these general interaction rates remain similar within online social networks 87,88 .

The possibility that the parameters on all social networks (online or offline) are governed by basic underlying factors is further supported by research showing that similar structures also exist within simpler social systems, such as animal soci eties 66,95 . For instance, the sizes and scaling of hierarchical "friendship" layers found in online and offline human networks are also found in dolphins, elephants, and various primate spe cies 96 , and the phenomena of humans increasing the number and strength of their social networks connections following the death of a friend on Facebook 97 is also seen in wild birds, which show compensatory upregulation of their social network con nections upon experiencing the loss of a social associate 98 .

Supporting the idea that limited cognitive capacities govern our social structures is research showing that the brain regions predicting individual variation in social network size in humans also do so for macaques 99 . Strong support for simple underly ing factors (such as time) governing our general patterning of social interactions can be found in studies demonstrating that entirely computationally simulated systems replicate some of the apparent complexities of human social networks, even un der relatively simple rules 100,101 . Examples include agentbased models generating similar social layering structures as humans when sociality is defined as time limited 100 .

In light of the current evidence regarding how the Inter net may have affected human thinking surrounding social networks, it is undeniable that the online environment pos es unique potential and context for social activity 79,80,102,103 , which may invoke some nonidentical cognitive processes and brain areas in comparison to the offline world 74,75 . Neverthe less, aside from these comparatively finescale differences, it appears that our brains process the online and offline social networks in surprisingly similar ways, as demonstrated by the shared cognitive capacities and simple underlying factors ulti mately governing their fundamental structure 87,88 . As such, the online social world has very significant implications for not only measuring and understanding human sociality, but also for governing the outcomes of social processes across various aspects of life.

Given the evidence above, an appropriate metaphor for the relationship between online and realworld sociality could be a "new playing field for the same game" . Even beyond the funda mental structure, emerging research suggests that neurocogni tive responses to online social occurrences are similar to those of reallife interactions. For instance, being rejected online has been shown to increase activity in brain regions strongly linked with social cognition and realworld rejection (medial pre frontal cortex 104 ) in both adults and children 105107 . However, within the "same old game" of human sociality, online social media is bending some of the rules -potentially at the expense of users 17 . For instance, whereas realworld acceptance and rejection is often ambiguous and open to selfinterpretation, social media platforms directly quantify our social success (or failure), by providing clear metrics in the form of "friends" , "fol lowers" , and "likes" (or the potentially painful loss/absence of these) 107 . Given the addictive nature of this immediate, self defining feedback, social media companies may even capital ize upon this to maximally engage users 17 . However, growing evidence indicates that relying on online feedback for self esteem can have adverse effects on young people, particularly those with low socialemotional wellbeing, due to high rates of cyberbullying 108 , increased anxiety and depression 109,110 , and increased perceptions of social isolation and exclusion among those who feel rejected online 111 .

Another process common to human social behaviour in both online and offline worlds is the tendency to make upward social comparisons 112,113 . Whereas these can be adaptive and beneficial under regular environmental conditions 112 , this im plicit cognitive process can also be hijacked by the artificial environmental manufactured on social media 113,114 , which showcases hypersuccessful individuals constantly putting their best foot forward, and even using digital manipulation of images to inflate physical attractiveness. By facilitating ex posure to these drastically upward social comparisons (which would rarely be encountered in everyday life), online social media can produce unrealistic expectations of oneself -leading to poor body image and negative selfconcept, particularly for younger people 107,111,115,116 . For instance, in adolescents (par ticularly females), those who spent more time on social media and smartphones have a greater prevalence of mental health problems, including depression, than those who spent more time on "nonscreen" activities 116 , with greater than 5 hrs/day (versus 1 hr/day) associated with a 66% increased risk of one suiciderelated outcome 117 .

However, a causal relationship between high levels of social media use and poorer mental health is currently difficult to es tablish, as there is most likely a complex interaction between several confounding factors, including reduced sleep and in person social interaction, and increased sedentary behaviour and perceived loneliness 116,118 . Nonetheless, given the large amounts of social media use observed among young people, future research should thoroughly examine the potentially detrimental effects that this new setting for sociality may have on health and wellbeing, along with aiming to establish the driving factors -such that adjustments can be made in subse quent iterations of social media in order to produce more posi tive outcomes.

Whereas young people with mental disorders may be the most vulnerable to negative input from social media, these media may also present a new platform for improving men tal health in this population, if used correctly. In future, social media may also be exploited to promote ongoing engage ment with Internetbased interventions, while addressing key (but frequently neglected) targets such as social connected ness, social support and selfefficacy, to aim to bring about sustained functional improvements in severe and complex mental health conditions 119 . To achieve these goals, online so cial mediabased interventions need to be designed to pro mote engagement by harnessing, in an ethical and transparent manner, effective strategies used by the industry. For instance, developing technologies which are increasingly adopted by on line marketing and tech companies, such as natural language processing, sentiment analyses and machine learning, could be capitalized upon, for example making it possible to identify those at increased risk for suicide or relapse 120 , and rationaliz ing human driven support to those who need it most at the time they need it 121 . In addition, online systems will be able to learn from what helps individuals and when, opening a window into personalized, real time interventions 121 .

While the use of online social mediabased interventions is in its infancy, pioneering efforts indicate that these interven tions are safe, engaging, and have the potential to improve clinical and social outcomes in both patients and their rela tives 122127 . That said, online interventions have failed up to now to be adopted by mental health services 128,129 . The main reasons include high attrition rates, poor study designs which reduce translational potential, and a lack of consensus around the required standards of evidence for widespread implemen tation of Internetdelivered therapies 130132 . Efforts are currently underway to determine the longterm effects of the first gener ation of social mediabased interventions for mental illness via large randomized controlled trials 133,134 . Alongside this clinical use, developing public health strategies for young adults in the general population to avoid the potential adverse effects and negative aspects of typical social media are also warranted.

As digital technologies become increasingly integrated with everyday life, the Internet is becoming highly proficient at capturing our attention, while producing a global shift in how people gather information, and connect with one another. In this review, we found emerging support for several hypotheses regarding the pathways through which the Internet is influenc ing our brains and cognitive processes, particularly with re gards to: a) the multifaceted stream of incoming information encouraging us to engage in attentionalswitching and "multi tasking" , rather than sustained focus; b) the ubiquitous and rapid access to online factual information outcompeting previ ous transactive systems, and potentially even internal memory processes; c) the online social world paralleling "real world" cognitive processes, and becoming meshed with our offline sociality, introducing the possibility for the special properties of social media to impact on "real life" in unforeseen ways.

However, with fewer than 30 years since the Internet became publicly available, the longterm effects have yet to be estab lished. Within this, it seems particularly important that future research determines the impact of the Internet on us through out different points in the lifespan. For instance, the Internet's digital distractions and supernormal capacities for cognitive offl oading seem to create a nonideal environment for the re finement of higher cognitive functions in critical periods of children and adolescents' brain development. Indeed, the first longitudinal studies on this topic have found that adverse at tentional effects of digital multitasking are particularly pro nounced in early adolescence (even compared to older teens) 34 , and that higher frequency of Internet use over 3 years in chil dren is linked with decreased verbal intelligence at follow up, along with impeded maturation of both grey and white matter regions 135 .

On the other hand, the opposite may be true in older adults experiencing cognitive decline, for whom the online environ ment may provide a new source of positive cognitive stimula tion. For instance, Internet searching engaged more neural circuitry than reading text pages in Internet savvy older adults (aged 5576 years) 9 . Furthermore, experimental studies have found that computer games available online and through smartphones can be used to attenuate agingrelated cogni tive decline 136138 . Thus, the Internet may present a novel and accessible platform for adults to maintain cognitive function throughout old age. Building from this, successful cognitive aging has previously been shown to be dependent upon learn ing and deploying cognitive strategies, which can compensate for agingrelated decline in "raw" memory capacities 139 . This has previously been referred to as optimizing internal cogni tive processes (e.g., through mnemonic strategies), or tak ing advantage of cognitive offloading in traditional formats (list making, transactive memory, etc.) 139 . Nonetheless, as Internet based technologies become more deeply integrated with our daily cognitive processing (through smartphones, wearables, etc.), digital natives could feasibly develop forms of "online cognition" in the aging brain, whereby older adults can increasingly take advantage of webbased transactive memory and other emerging online processes to fulfil (or even exceed) the typical capacities of a younger brain.

Although it is an emerging area of study, the same could apply for social aspects of the online world. Whereas young people seem particularly prone to the rejections, peer pres sure, and negative appraisals this world may induce 107 , older adults may ultimately be able to harness social media in order to overcome isolation and thus continue to benefit from the 20515545, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wps.20617, Wiley Online Library on [01/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License diverse range of physical, mental and neurocognitive benefits associated with social connection 73 . Viewed collectively, the nascent research in this area already indicates that equivalent types of Internet usage may have differential effects on indi viduals' cognitive and social functioning depending on their point in the lifespan.

For better or for worse, we are already conducting a mass scale experiment of extensive Internet usage across the global population. A more finescale analysis is essential to gaining a fuller understanding of the sustained impact of this usage across our society. This could include measuring frequency, duration and types of Internet usage as a standard part of na tional data projects, for instance through collecting Internet data (from either devicebased or selfreport measures) in "biobank" assessment protocols. Combining this with the ex tensive genetic, sociodemographic, lifestyle and neuroimag ing data gathered by some ongoing projects, researchers could be able to establish the impact of Internet usage on psychologi cal wellbeing and brain functioning across entire populations (rather than the currently limited study samples), while also controlling for multiple confounders.

Overall, this early phase of the Internet's introduction into our society is a crucial period for commencing rigorous and extensive research into how different types of Internet usage interact with human cognition, in order to maximize our op portunities for harnessing this new tool in a beneficial manner, while minimizing the potentially adverse effects.

20515545, 2019, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wps.20617, Wiley Online Library on [01/07/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License